# Project: Data Lake

## Introduction

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, I was tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

## Project Description

In this project I needed to:

* load data from S3
* process the data into analytics tables using Spark (transforms them to create five different tables)
* load them back into S3 - writes them to partitioned parquet files in table directories on S3

## Database schema design

Database schema that was utilized in this project is one of the simplest data mart schemas named **Star Schema** which consist in our case of one **fact table** - **songplay_table and several **dimension tables - ** **artist_table, user_table, songs_table and time_table**

## ETL pipeline

ETL pipeline was designed with a main focus on getting the insights into understanding what songs users are listening to.

The script etl.py (ETL pipeline) reads the json data from `song_data` and `log_data` files located in S3 buckets transforms them to create five different tables, and writes them to partitioned parquet files in table directories on S3.

Each of the five tables are written to parquet files in a separate analytics directory on S3. Each table has its own folder within the directory. Songs table files are partitioned by year and then artist. Time table files are partitioned by year and month. Songplays table files are partitioned by year and month.

## Project Template

The project template includes three files:

- `etl.py` reads data from S3, processes that data using Spark, and writes them back to S3
- `dl.cfg`contains template for AWS credentials
- `README.md` provides discussion on your process and decisions

### Project Datasets

Two datasets reside in S3. Here are the S3 links for each:

- Song data: `s3://udacity-dend/song_data`
- Log data: `s3://udacity-dend/log_data`

### Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

### Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```